# 1. Variables and Wires
## Variables
Variables in Phi are software-only constructs that are only processed at compile-time.

Variables can be coupled with an array subscript, i.e. `Var[31..0]`, to declare an Integer. Integers may be up to 65536 bits long.

Variables support a lot of operations, and all these operations have values that are known at compile time known as **variable expressions**. As such, all constants are considered to be variable expressions.

Variables can be assigned to anywhere in the body of a module that is not an `async` block. Assignments and aynsc blocks will be documented later.

```phi
    Var[15..0] variable;
```
***Snippet 0: Example declaration of a variable***

## Wires
Wires in Phi represent logical connections in hardware.

Like variables, wires can be coupled with an array subscript, i.e. `Wire[31..0]`, to declare a Bus. Buses are treated as variable length integers throughout the entirety of Phi.

Buses may be up to 65536 bits long.

Buses support most of the same operations performed on variables with the exception of system calls, multiplication and division. Unlike variables, Wire values are only unknown at run time.

The results of bus operations are called bus expressions. **All variable expressions are bus expressions, but the converse is not true.**

```phi
    Wire[15..0] variable;
```
***Snippet 1: Example declaration of a wire***

### Driving
A **driver** determines the value of the wire. A driver is either:
* An assignment using the `=` operator at the top level of a module
* An `async` block in which this wire is assigned (detailed in Section 4)

The same wire cannot have more than one driver.

```phi
    variable = 16d9090;
    Wire[15..0] otherVariable = variable &+ 32b1010;
```
***Snippet 2: Examples for driving a wire***


## Operations
Operations in Phi are strict about bus widths: namely, if operations have mismatched or otherwise incompatible width, the compiler shall return a semantic error.

### $
* Type: Special
* Operand: Many variable expressions of variable widths
* Result: One X-bit variable expression

Invocation of a system call as shall be detailed later in the language. The result depends on the system call.

### +
* Type: Binary
* Operands: Two X-bit expressions
* Result: (X+1)-bit expression

Performs integer addition on the two buses. The carry bit is appended to become the most significant bit.

### &+
* Type: Binary
* Operands: Two X-bit expressions
* Result: X-bit expression

Performs integer addition on the two buses. The carry bit is discarded.

### TODO: Other operations.