# 2. Latches and Registers
Latches and registers represent units of storage in Phi. They are roughly analogous to D-flipflops and D-latches in actual hardware.

Like wires, latch and register values can be read. However, assignments work in a very special manner, as you will see in the **Resetting** section.

In Phi, latches and registers are structural objects: they are modified in terms of their properties. Conditioning latches and clocking registers are done by assigning values to properties of the latches and registers.

As hardware is perpetual, latches are coupled with a **condition** signal and registers are coupled with a **clock** signal to make them functions in their **states** as well as its inputs and outputs.

## 2.1 Latches
```phi
    Latch latch;
    latch.condition = condition;
    latch.data = data;
```
***Snippet 0: Example declaration of a latch***

This declares a 1-bit latch conditioned with `condition`. When condition is **high**, the latch's value becomes the expression assigned to the wire `latch.data`: in this case, a separate wire named data.

## 2.2 Registers
### 2.2.1 Clocking
```phi
    Register[31..0] register;
    register.clock = clock;
    register.data  = register &+ 32b1;
```
***Snippet 1: Example declaration of a register***

This declares a 32-bit register clocked with `clock`. When clock is at the positive edge, the register's value becomes the expression assigned to the wire `register.data`: in this case, it would be the value of the register added to 1.

### 2.2.2 Resetting
#### 2.2.2.1 Synchronous
Synchronous resets are straightforward:

```phi
    register.data = reset ? register &+ 32b1 : 32b0;
```
***Snippet 2: A synchronous reset***

#### 2.2.2.2 Asynchronous
Asynchronous resets are slightly more verbose.

```phi
    register.reset = reset; // High

    register.reset = ~reset; // Low
```
***Snippet 3: Asyncronous reset examples***

Registers take their initial assigned value when reset combhronously, i.e. you would have to assign the register a value at some point in the code.

Here are some valid options:

```phi
    // Inline assignment
    Register register = 1b0;
    register.reset = reset;

    // Out-of-line assignment. Note how it does not necessarily need to come before the .reset assignment.
    Register register;
    register.reset = reset;

    register = 1b0;
```
***Snippet 4: Examples of register reset assignments***

### 2.2.3 Enabling
`register.enable` is an optional port to specify. This will act as an enable for the register.

If no wire is assigned to `register.enable`, the register is enabled for writes by default.

### 2.2.4 Shorthand Annotations
In port declarations, you can quickly specify which ports are supposed to be clocks and resets as typically, clocking every single register can be a chore.

```phi
module Counter(
    clock: @clock Input,
    reset: @resetLow Input,
    output: Output[31..0]
) 
```
***Snippet 5: Shorthand annotations as a part of port declarations***

This will set it so all registers declared within counter automatically have their clock signal set to `clock` and their reset signal set to `~reset`.

There are six such annotations:

0. `clock` uses the positive edge of the clock.
1. `clockLow` uses the negative edge of the clock.
2. `reset` uses an active-high reset.
3. `resetLow` uses an active-low reset.
4. `enable` uses an active-high enable.
5. `enableLow` uses an active-low enable.
