# 5. Function
In expressions, Phi allows for a number of function calls. These all return integers and shall always return the same output for the same inputs.

Functions are the only place in Phi where `strings` are allowed, as they are used for file paths.

Calling a function is detailed in Section 1.4.1.

If a call to a function fails, i.e. for example the IO ones fail to find the file, compilation shall abort.

There is no mechanism for Phi users to define their own functions analogous to the Verilog Procedural Interface, but that may be added in the future. All functions are in the `Sys` namespace.

## 5.1 Function List
All following parameters and outputs are software expressions.

---
### 5.1.1 abs
* Parameters: X-bit
* Output: X-bit

Returns the absolute value of a number, treating it as a one's complement signed number if necessary.

---
### 5.1.2 log
* Parameters:
    * number: X-bit
    * base: Y-bit
* Output: X-bit

Returns the log<sub>base</sub>(number). Any fractional portions are truncated, as Phi has no support for IEEE floating point.

(Implementation note: Log becomes inaccurate over 52-bits: we would need to implement log in llvm::APFloat otherwise, which is not viable.)

---
### 5.1.3 pow
* Parameters:
    * number: X-bit
    * exponent: Y-bit
* Output: X-bit

Returns number<sup>exponent</sup>.

(Implementation note: If either X or Y is over 32-bit, this becomes slow as it uses multiplication. Tread at your own risk.)

---
### 5.1.4 fromFile
* Parameters:
    * name: std::string (The path to the file.)
    * offset: X-bit number (The offset of the byte in the file.)
    * bytes: X-bit number (The number of bytes to concatenate.)
    * endianness: 1-bit number  (1b0: Little endian, 1b1: big endian)
* Output: (8 * bytes)-bit number

Reads a value from a ***raw binary*** file.

(For Verilog migrants, the closest equivalent to readmemb/h is ***interpretFromFile*** below.)

The offset and byte count width depends on your operating system, which is why it is a variable width number. You are free to supply any offset, but bits that go beyond your C standard library's limit will be truncated.

The bytes retrieved are concatenated and transformed into a bitvector for use in Phi.

```
    Wire[7..0] ROM[65536];
    for i in 0..65535 {
        ROM[i] = $Sys.fromFile("program.bin", i, 1, 1b0);
    }
```
***Snippet 0: Example call for fromFile***

This File I/O is performed at compile time, making it barely fancier than an import statement. The resulting code will embed the numbers in some fashion.

---
### 5.1.5 interpretFromFile
* Parameters:
    * name: std::string (The path to the file.)
    * offset: X-bit number (The offset in the file.)
* Output: (Depends on the file)-bit number

Perhaps more useful than `fromFile` for bit widths that are not a multiple of 8, this will read a list of line ending-delimited strings from a file and interprets them as Phi numbers.

```
17x12910
17x09124
17x160FA
```
***Snippet 1: example.txt, compatible with the `interpretFromFile` function.***

```
    Wire[16..0] ROM[3];
    for i in 0..2 {
        ROM[i] = $Sys.interpretFromFile("example.txt", i);
    }

    Wire[16..0] magic = $Sys.interpretFromFile("example.txt", 3);
```
***Snippet 2: Using interpret from file.***


